He said, did you know that the public health grades
have been posted? And I said, no, I didn't know
that. He said, as usual, you made an A. That was his
first words to me in four years. That man and I
finished at the same time, and then later I found
out that his license had been suspended. You know,
that's another irony. His license was suspended
for
unethical practice.
But there are many subtle ways in which
discrimination is practiced. How about as a
student here, you were probably in your class, you
were probably, what, there were 30, about 20 or 30,
25 or about that graduated in your class, I would
say? No, no, we were 64. 64? Oh, yeah, I see. The list
was that long? I read it down and I didn't realize it
was that long. No, see, in my class, at that time
there were accepting 64 a year, and I told you that
three had joined us, you see, from a previous
class, so it made 67, but some of them didn't make
it, see. So, we only finished, I don't remember
exactly, but it seemed to me that we finished with
about 64 people. Okay, and you were, were you the
only, you were the only Mexican? Oh, absolutely. I
was the only one for years. Did you feel that you
were treated differently by your instructors?
No, sir. Not by my teachers. I never experienced
any discrimination from my teachers here.
No. Why do you think that? Why do you think that was?
Well, I think that my teachers, and when I say my
teachers, I'm talking about Dr. Jaggi, Dr. Turk,
Dr.
I think that those people represented a special
breed who had a lot of vision and who could look into
the future and see that there was no place for
discrimination on a campus such as ours. I never,
from my teacher, I never received any indication
of discrimination. It was rather Well, from other
departments.
I remember- What do you mean from other
departments? I remember an English course that I
took. I took an English course under a guy by the
name of Greer. I'll never forget him as long as I
live. Because- And this was back in 43 or 44? It was
1943, in January 1943. I had a course- wait a
minute. No, it was in the summer of 1943. Okay.
You see in in high school I graduated third out of a
class of 207. My grades are extremely high and I was
co-editor of my high school paper so I have always
scored very high grades in English in
composition. I have written professionally and
so forth and all of my teachers have praised my
English. But when I got to this guy, Greer, I took
sophomore English under him. It was English 203,
if I remember correctly.
He used to return my papers unmarked with a D or an F,
every paper that I turned into. So when I went to him
and I said, look, I'm not going to learn anything in
this course if you don't tell me what mistakes I'm
making or how I can improve my grade in your course.
Because you return my papers unmarked. That
doesn't teach me anything. He said, I don't like
your style. And that's what he gave me. I got a D in
English after I had been a straight-A student in
English up to that time. As a matter of fact, I saved
those papers. And one time when I was walking down
the hall of the academic building, I met a former
English teacher of mine. And he said, how are you
getting along in sophomore English? And I told him
I'm failing that course. He said, my God, how can
that be? I said, I'll tell you what, I have here in my
notebook a bunch of papers that have been returned
to me unmarked except for the grade. He said, let me
have him. And he took him with him. And then the next
time he saw me, he said, if I were you, I'd take these
papers to the head of the English department and
tell him what this guy's doing to you. Well, I think
of an overt sign of discrimination. Did you take
those papers? No. No, I didn't take those papers
anywhere because, you know, A&M has a system here.
You can't beat the system.
A lot of other people have tried, and I'm not going
to be the first one to stand up against the Board of
Regents or anybody else, because you can't win.
I'm nearing now
the end of my professional career. I'm eligible
for retirement.
I feel that my speaking out on this issue would just
create a hell of a lot of enemies and uh and and not
get anything done. I wrote a letter to President
Miller warning him that unless this this
university reversed its trends to discriminate
against Hispanics
that we may be in for some chastisement from the
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
And two weeks after I wrote that letter, they sent a
team from Washington out here to- I never told
Washington anything. As a matter of fact, the
letter I wrote to President Miller was not sent
through channels. It was sent directly to his
home. And I called attention to a disproportion of
disproportionate low number of Hispanics
attending the university. There's 31,000 people
here. Less than 1% are Mexicans in a state that has
30%. It doesn't make sense.
I want to ask you a question. I had a senior
administrator at this university tell me last
year that Mexican-Americans have all seen A&M as
an opportunity to advance and have always
realized that there's no discrimination against
them and that's why we always have
Mexican-Americans. Like you say, we have a lot of
Mexican-American Aggie former students who are
quite proud of being former students here and
obviously you disagree with that. Of course I
disagree with it because uh like I say less than one
percent of the students are Mexican-American now
those are not my figures they were published in the
battalion they're items of common knowledge I
saved that article it's I don't know I can't find it
right now I'm just moving into this office but uh
there were those statistics reveal that uh very
very few Mexican-Americans in this institution.
I don't know why. I have talked to several people in
this department about it, and they said, well,
you're distorting, you know, the facts. And I
asked them, how am I distorting the facts? I said,
because in the first place, if you take all the
Mexican-Americans in the state of Texas, how many
of them would have the money to send their children
to college? See, that knocks out a lot of that 30%
figure that you're citing. In other words, very
few people from minority groups would have the
money to go to college. And out of those that do have
the money to go to college, well, a lot of them pick
careers that are not offered at A&M. For example,
law, and they go to the University of Texas. or
where they go to to some university like
Kingsville A&I or to some other one
but that I don't think that I don't think that that
is factual I don't think that the number of people
of Mexican-American descent are so destitute
that they can't send their children to college. I
don't believe that. And then, of course, a logical
question is why isn't there some sort of a
scholarship program? No, you know, let me give you
a couple of examples
that I think are significant. People here that
reject the idea that there's discrimination
against Hispanics. Or very quick to point out that
several years ago we had a commander of the Corps of
Cadets here from Laredo who was Hispanic. If what
you say is true, that example there will negate
anything else you say. The guy was so outstanding
that it would have been difficult to keep him out of
the slot of commander of the Corps. Did you know
him? No, I didn't. The
name is Gutierrez. I knew him and I knew, of course,
his father I went to school with.
They came from a very wealthy family, Laredo,
who experienced some very, very hard times
following the death of their father. But the
example that I wanted to give you was the example of
McClure, the black student, who came to this
campus and was president of the student body. What
year was that? Do you remember? A couple of years
ago. I mean, when that guy, he was recruited, I
think, I don't have any direct evidence of this,
but I feel that he was recruited
because they saw in him a tremendous potential.
And he was a gifted speaker. As a matter of fact, to
quote Wayne Stark of the Memorial Student Center,
he said, when they made McClure, they threw the
mold away. He was not exceptional. And as a senior
at A&M, he delivered three commencement
exercises in this area. Where'd he go? I heard that
he had gone to Washington to work for Senator
Tower. And I think that you can expect to hear more
about this fellow on the floor. He's a black. But
you see, my response to some of these allegations
that blacks and Mexicans or Hispanics don't have
the intellectual capacity to make it through
here, and I've heard that from people that should
never have told me that. People are in very highly
placed positions here. Really? That's right. In
the vet school? No. But in the administration?
Well one of them is a veterinarian, but he's not in
vet school. You heard that from the
administrators? He told me that in his opinion
blacks didn't have the intellectual capacity to
be veterinarians. That the only way that we could
have an increased number of blacks as
veterinarians would be to reduce the admission
requirements so that they would qualify. Of
course, I don't condone that. I don't advocate
that at all. I think that you could find that the A&M
could find a respectable number of minority
students if they sought them, if they made some
legitimate
efforts to seek outstanding students in the
public schools of Texas and interest them in the
veterinary profession. I believe that we could
get a much higher number than we have had in the
past. But you see, now you have to recognize one
outstanding fact in all of this, in all of these
discussions, that
since my resignation as director of the Institute
of Tropical Veterinary Medicine, I don't have any
any reason anymore for mingling with other
department members on this campus. And so my
communication now with the rest of the campus has
been very seriously curtailed as a result of the
fact that I'm not an administrator anymore. I was
an administrator for for two years.
No, wait a minute, three years. Were you the first
Mexican-American to be appointed to the faculty?
Of the College of Indian Medicine? Yes. Well,
yeah, I can't answer that question. I think that
they had one or two others, but they didn't stick
around.
I know that I'm the only full professor who's been
appointed to the College of Animal Medicine as a
Mexican American. There was another guy who had a
Spanish surname, but he couldn't speak one word of
Spanish. And so he, you know, he was used as a body to
indicate that this man was a minority, but he
wasn't. He had a Spanish surname, but That's all.
He knew no Spanish and he had never been raised in a
Spanish environment. He came from another state
and so forth.
But I know that if you visit other agencies on this
campus, you will find reams and stacks of
reference material to contradict everything
that I had told you, because it's very easy to do
that. But on the other hand, I think it would be
quite difficult for anybody to say, yes, we do have
a very active recruitment program, and here is the
evidence right here. We have sent people to
Laredo. We have sent people to Eagle Pass. We sent
people to Brownsville or McAllen or Kingsville to
find interest in the A&M. I don't have access to any
such information. I've never sought it. Why don't
we try it? Why don't we have that type of program, do
you think? I don't know.
I don't know. I know that the people will say, The
head of the Former Students Association, he's a
Mexican. There's a guy by the name of Fernandez,
Raul Fernandez. Did you know that? He's head of the
alumni. This year, as a matter of fact, he's
president, isn't he? Yeah.
It's a one-year, it's elected one-year term,
right? Yeah. It's a one-year position. What I'd
like to see here is, I would like to see a sincere
effort you see of recruitment I don't like for
people to try and snow me with figures and papers
because anybody can do that but what I'm talking
about is I would like to personally see the names of
people who are on a committee that has designed a
program for recruitment of minority groups to the
College of Internal Medicine as well as to other
departments within this campus. Have you ever
become involved in any of it? No. Why not?
Well,
I have for the first time in my life since I, you
know, The answer to your question is very complex.
I have married a wonderful girl from Michigan.
She's not Mexican-American. She's Dutch.
My kids are
mongrels. I tell them they're mongrels. They've
got Spanish blood and Indian blood and I myself am
part Irish and my wife's Dutch and so
I have been in the Army for so long there was no
opportunity for me to participate viably in any
Chicano movement of any kind. I never joined the
LULACs and I never been a part of the or the Raza
Unida or anything like this, and being in the Army,
you know, those political affiliations are not
encouraged more around quite a bit, and really
don't sink your roots very deep into any
community. But here, I've spent now about 16 years
of my life here in this area, and I designed, built
my own home here. I have felt many times that to join
one of these politically active groups would be, I
think, polarizing
people of my ancestry too much. Yet, there's
several groups that have been very effective in
the
in the effort to enhance the social aspects of the
lives of Hispanics. And I think the technical and
also the job opportunities have been increased by
a lot of these groups. Primarily, some of them are
quite militant. Primarily the American GI Forum.
Yes?
Is this what you wanted? You said you called down.
This is a heavier suspension. No, I didn't call
down. It must have been Dr. Hellman. I have not
called you about that, but he's injected those
mice. Well, he did, and nothing happened. No, I
didn't call. I told him I'd give him a heavier
suspension. Would you give that to him, please,
sir? His office is dark. I'd be glad to take that.
Should that be refrigerated until the injection
is made? Yes, sir. We're doing a count on it now.
Okay. But it's a much heavier suspension than the
previous one. Okay, thank you.
No, that's a good question, you know. Why haven't I
joined any of these groups? As a matter of fact, I
was just looking before you came over here. One of
these people or one of these groups wrote me an
invitation here to attend a convention that's
going to be held in Austin. It's called, let me see,
Something about the Chicanos in Higher
Education.
The Association of Chicanos in Higher Education,
they call themselves TACHE, T-A-C-H-E. And
they're gonna have a convention in Austin next
month. Like I said, I've never joined any of these
groups. It's not because I'm opposed to their
objectives. But I'm not at all known in the LULAC.
I'm not at all known in the American GI Forum. So I
felt that it was too late in my professional career
to really make any significant contribution to
any of these groups since I had never participated
before. So
you decided not to go over to Austin? Well, I have
not decided. but I have never attended any of their
conferences. I don't even know whether there's
any active chapter of Thatcher here on this
campus. There must be, but I don't know about it. In
short, I have not gone out of my way to join any of
these groups who espoused the cause of the Chicano
or the Latin American or the Hispanic.
Now here in this community, I was the director of
the Black and White Ball Association in 1978. And
what exactly is that? Okay, the Black and White is
called the Bryan College Station Black and White
Ball Association. This is an organization of both
Anglos and Hispanics,
which was formed in the early 30s in an effort to
bring together people of both backgrounds to see
if they could dispel some of the instances of
discrimination and really try to understand each
other's culture. And every significant city in
Texas that is south of here, particularly, has a
local organization. And the objectives of this
organization, which is a loosely organized
association,
we don't have any ties to any other one. It's just
organized locally. Ours, for example, is
organized not only to promote better relations
between the two cultures, but also to give
scholarships to children whose parents are in
need of some financial assistance.
That is the only reason for the existence of the
Bryan College Station Black and White Ball
Association. I would like to tell you why the name
Black and White Ball is introduced. It is not
because of the melanization of a person's skin,
but rather because of the attire that is
customary or traditional to wear at these
functions. They hold a dance once a year, and to
this dance is a very formal occasion. and you're
only permitted to wear either black or white.
Either a black tuxedo or a white tuxedo or a
combination of black and white. And the
objectives, as I said, our particular
association exists only to help needy students go
to college.
during my tour as president in 1978, we gave 12
scholarships
that ranged between four and $500. And this year,
this last year, 1979,
they gave an equal number of scholarships. So
that's about $5,000. It's a non-profit
organization. Where do you get the funds? We get
the funds from several sources.
I think probably the greatest,
the most productive source of funds has been the
printing of a brochure that is handed out to the
people who have bought a ticket to the dance. And in
that brochure, it's full of advertisements, and
the local merchants have paid to advertise in
these brochures, and we have had several hundred
printed up, and that has provided us with the
greatest source of our income. Also, of course,
the dance itself.
We charge $10 per person, but with this goes a
breakfast and contributions from people. We have
managed to... When I took this organization over
in 1978, they had no constitution. They had never
even applied for an IRS tax-exempt status. So they
were paying taxes? They never paid any taxes
because they had made very little money. Oh, I see.
You see, the IRS never questioned their receipts
because they were, you know, very nominal, very
modest, but now when we formed a constitution and
elected officers and spelled out who the officers
would be and how they would be elected and when the
meeting would be held. You know, a constitution,
no organization should exist without a
constitution. And then on the heels of that, I
wrote to the IRS and after filling out a tremendous
number of forms, they granted us tax exempt
status. And so now, why they recognize the Black
and White Ball Association as being a charitable
organization that had no desire to make any
profits, is all the money is turned over in the
spring to those students who have applied for the
scholarships and have been selected by their
committee. and have manifested some, have
substantiated in some way the fact that they have
been accepted by an institution of higher
learning, and it's been a very successful
program. And are these just basically poor
students? Yes, but you see, here's something that
the Anglo residents of this community have never
taken time out to learn. These scholarships are
not given only to Hispanics. As a matter of fact,
out of the 12 that were the recipients in 1978, I
think only one was Hispanic. The rest of them were
Anglos.
And this year, maybe one or two were Hispanics. So
the recipients of these is not based on on color, or
creed, or nationality, or you see, it's for both
cultures.
I remember calling the mayor of College Station
one time and asking him for a country.